I'm putting this on, OK?
We're with Mr. Dave Kirshenbaum in New York at the Carnegie Bookshop.
I just want to identify the tape.
And you just told me you have a catalog of George D. Smith when he was selling things for $2.
How you doing?
David Redden?
Yeah, I'm going to give it to David.
Well, you know what?
You could loan it to me, and I'll give it back to you.
Sadler.
I have that Sadler set over there.
I've got to shut this off later.
Well, anyway, you said that you may well be the only person alive.
Well, I don't know of anybody.
But it's possible.
I don't know of anybody.
I don't remember.
I don't remember anybody.
Did you attend as a bookman?
Yes.
And so were you there bidding and...
Hoping to bid or buy?
That's right.
How old were you then?
Well, I was born in 95.
I'll be 95 January 5.
God bless you.
I had your energy.
What's your secret?
Is there a secret to this?
No secret.
I've been in this business.
I opened in 1910.
Here in New York?
In New York.
I've been in New York ever since, and I've attended every important sale, any sale as a matter of fact, important and non-important.
Would you say that you do most of your acquiring at options, or do you also do private advertising?
No, no.
Years ago, I used to buy big libraries.
You see, I had a very big place, I have to tell you.
I now dwindle down to doing specifics only.
I had a very big place.
I had a place twenty times, forty times the size.
Must have had two, three hundred thousand books.
Wow.
And I was there for 59th Street.
I was there for fifty years.
Was it also called the Carnegie Bookshop?
Yeah.
Has it always been called the Carnegie Bookshop, your business?
Yes.
And you said you used to buy entire libraries.
I used to buy entire libraries, yes.
And I'd buy at auction.
I'd buy for customers.
You, as I understand it, were extremely friendly with Bradley Martin.
Very friendly.
For fifty years, I used to see him.
I had lunch with him two or three times a week.
Were you largely responsible for building his library?
A great many of the things.
He bought all over the world.
Would you judge him as one of the great book collectors of your lifetime?
No question about it.
In terms of not only the quality of the collection, but also what other qualities would you say?
Well, first of all, he was particular about condition.
And if he didn't want a thing, no matter what it was, he wouldn't buy it.
And if he'd want it,
And he'd show him something, he'd sit right here where you're sitting.
And I would show him something.
No matter what I'd say, he'd take out his wallet, write a check right, sit down.
Was he the kind of collector who, and as we talk about Bradley Martin, I'm looking at his catalogs, the catalogs of his books over there, yeah, because I know the books.
He is one collector who really knew his books.
Oh, yes.
I'm sure there are collectors who don't even know half of the things that they have.
That's an accumulator.
That's not a collector.
Maybe you can define the difference for me.
Could you characterize one from the other?
There are some people that are accumulators.
They'll take anything.
But there are some people that are very careful with what they eat.
You've got to give them certain things.
Were you disappointed that the Martin Collection was sold?
Do you think it should have been kept together as a unit?
Well, that's been going on for many years.
I had taught Bradley and Mrs. Martin and Gordon Ray, who he was very fond of.
Gordon Ray was the head of the Guggenheim Foundation.
And we tried.
to give the collection, his bird book collection.
That's probably a copy.
You were saying that Bradley Martin's interest was birds.
I think that was the last thing that you said.
Well, his bird books were extraordinary.
It was really a great, great collection.
It was even suggested that there was perhaps the greatest
ornithological collection anywhere.
No, that's right.
And that might have been an argument for keeping it as a unit.
That's right.
How did you personally feel about that?
Did it bother you to see it broken up?
Well, yes, in a way, because it'll never be put together again.
And yet there's the argument on the other side that was used for Robert Ho, it was suggested for Bradley Martin,
That where would the collectors of tomorrow be if people didn't allow their books to go back into the marketplace?
That's true.
How do you feel about that?
Well, I feel that he wanted to give it away, but— That's—you think he did.
He wanted—he wanted to give it away as a unit, or he wanted to— As a unit.
He did?
Yes.
Why didn't he—he was so careful about everything else in his lifetime.
Well, he was very careful.
He wanted to give it to the Smithsonian.
and it didn't work out.
You mean he just never got around to it?
No, he did go around to it.
The association, they didn't handle it properly.
Really?
That's too bad.
We went to Indiana, we thought they wanted it.
Lilly, the Lilly Library?
Yeah, that's quite an extraordinary library.
I was there with Mrs. Martin, and it just didn't materialize.
Then he got sick, you know, and he was sick for quite a time.
And up to, up to, very recent, I mean, I used to see him, as I said, two or three times a week.
We'd sit and talk.
all the catalogs that came in, and he'd mark off, you know, show me what he ordered.
We'd discuss things.
Of course, he was a gentleman.
He was a patrician in the truest sense.
Oh, yes.
But I also understand that he was very conscious of what he was paying for things, too.
I mean, he did not want to overpay.
Is that correct?
Well, I wouldn't make that statement, no.
If he wanted a thing, he'd buy it.
and worry about how much it cost later.
Let's go back to the beginning with yourself.
Now, if you were at the wholesale in 1911 and 1912, you were just 16, 17, 18 years old.
Yes, sir.
When I was 13, I went to Libby's in Boston.
There was an auction there.
Wow.
Let's start from the beginning, because I don't know very much about you.
Now, are you born in New York?
Yes.
And how did you become fascinated with books?
How did you become... Well, that's a question that I came in.
You know, things happen.
You have to sell books for the Salvation Army.
And how old were you then?
Well, I was about 12 or 13.
Uh-huh.
And those years when you were 12 or 13, you were a man.
Today, you're 12 or 13.
You're... I have grandchildren that are...
Nine and ten years old, they're infants, you know.
That's right.
We have our daughters who are eight and seven, and, you know, they're in first and second grade.
Well, you know, if you have daughters, I have nieces, but I have six grandchildren and six great-grandchildren.
Wow.
So, you're 12 or 13.
How did you know it was books that this was going to be your interest in them?
I didn't know.
I made a living at it.
So really, it was neat.
It wasn't love, shall we say, or obsession or fascination.
It wasn't love.
I got into it, and I pursued it.
And you went to Boston, you said?
I went to Boston to a sale, and I attended every sale here in New York and in Philadelphia.
Wow.
Did you know a lot of these people whose libraries were disposed of?
Like, for instance, let's start with the Great Hole auction, for instance.
Well, I didn't know Hole.
You didn't know Hole, but did you know Morgan?
Did you know J.P.
Morgan?
Oh, yes, yeah.
Tell me about him as a collector.
Well, he was a— How would you compare him to Bradley Martin, shall we say, in terms of— Well, there was a difference there, you see.
There was a difference in collecting.
Bradley was a more cultured man.
Would you say then that perhaps Morgan was closer to an accumulator than a collector?
No, but he had his mind set for certain things, you see.
He was a very rich man, you know.
Obviously, you know.
And so was Huntington, of course.
So was Huntington.
Huntington revolutionized book buying.
He used to be bought on block.
On block.
The phrase came in with him, didn't it?
That's right.
So within four or five years, he was able to put together
He bought everything.
Everything.
And did you ever meet any of these people, Huntington or Morgan?
No, I've met Morgan's brother, Henry Morgan.
I had some letters from him, yeah.
But the other collectors I knew as well.
Who would you say are some of the great collectors alive today?
Do they compare with the collectors of the Golden Age?
Well, I wouldn't know.
Dealers had certain, you know.
Well, from what you can see, I mean, this Richard Manny, for instance, who bought the Shakespeare's.
Yeah, yeah.
I guess he's moving pretty quickly, isn't he?
He's moving very heavily, thank you.
Two million.
That's right.
1.9 plus the, you know.
Plus the commission.
The commission, yeah.
I mean, he was sitting right next to me at the sale when he bought it.
He was?
Yeah.
What were you thinking?
I mean, they were going up for $50,000 pops.
He has a dealer.
Jim Cummins.
Jim was sitting next to me, and he was sitting right next to Jim.
And he'd tell him, go ahead, Jim.
What was going through your mind?
Now, you were at the wholesale where the Gutenberg Bible sold for $50,000.
And that was considered the greatest, the most, the greatest thing that ever happened.
And that price stood for years and years.
That's right.
And here, you're at an auction.
where the increments are $50,000.
I mean, what do you think when you see what has happened in your lifetime?
I can't think.
I sold things to people where they come up at auction and they bring 40 to 50 times.
What they bought them for.
Yeah.
What you sold them for.
Sure.
I could prove it.
I could give you examples of things that
Well, that went for three million.
How much?
Didn't the Japanese buy it for three million or something like that?
No, no.
Three million nine hundred dollars, almost four million dollars.
Twenty-nine thousand dollars.
My God, you're so confused.
And it was a perfect copy, too.
The finest copy I've ever seen.
Did he request that particular copy from you?
Did he ask you to purchase that copy for him?
Yeah, that particular copy she's asking.
That particular copy?
No, not that particular copy.
He sent me to Philadelphia to look at a copy.
And I went there, spent all day, and I came back.
He was living at that time on a certain place.
And I said, Bradley, this is not your...
This is not your quality, because when you turned the pages, they were torn, and they were spotted.
And I said, look, there's one in London I could buy for $29,000.
Let me buy that one for you.
So I ordered it.
So he said, fine.
Sure.
How much was the one in Philadelphia going for?
$21,000.
So we're talking $8,000.
But $8,000 was a lot of money in those days.
But he wanted the perfect copy.
And look what it went for.
Any other examples like that?
That's quite an extraordinary... No, I mean, there are lots of things that he bought.
Actually, I can get that stuff out of the catalog.
I think that's in the catalog.
I have the catalogs at home.
Well, there's a new catalog that's going to be out now.
I wrote the introduction to this.
Oh, really?
For the one that's coming down in a couple weeks?
Or the one that's coming down at the end of January?
That's right.
The big one, the Americano one?
Yeah.
Oh, that's supposed to be a wonderful auction.
I'm going to come to that.
I'm going to seek you out.
I might even sit near you.
Come on, sit with me.
So you haven't missed any of them?
No.
Did you know Jerome Curran?
No, I knew him well and knew his lawyer.
How do you explain a collector like Curran?
I guess what I'm driving at is because he decided to give everything up, to get rid of everything.
Well, things were at that peak, you know, and he sold everything.
And then he went in again for collecting.
It wasn't the same.
Do you think that he typifies a lot of the kind of collector who the drive is to acquire?
And once you have it, you almost lose interest in it?
I had a customer that came in years ago, 1929.
I got him interested and walked with me, Charles Feinberg.
And he just died.
He gave his whole collection to the Library of Congress.
I know that, yeah.
What?
I've heard that.
He was your customer?
There wasn't a day in the week that he didn't talk to me, you know.
I'd buy all this stuff for him.
I'd buy it everywhere.
Did you get him the first Leaves of Grass?
Yeah.
That's one of the toughest American books there is to get.
There's been dozens around.
Bradley has one.
We're talking about a book that's probably going to go for $150,000, $200,000, maybe more.
Leaves of Grass?
Yeah.
The first one now, the privately printed one.
1855.
Right.
That's right.
Well, how much do you think that's going to go for in fine condition?
$25,000.
That's all.
I thought that would command more than that.
I lost my ... Well, would you say that Kern was buying as an investor or as a collector?
He was buying as a collector.
He was buying both.
What do you think of people who buy for investment purposes as opposed to... Oh, that's a gamble you're taking.
That's a pure gamble you're taking, you know.
I mean, but what do you think of people who do that?
I don't bother with people like that.
If you want to buy for an investment, that's it.
You're down on Wall Street.
We're talking about the difference between the person who buys, say, a Van Gogh for $40,000 or $50,000 million.
The difference between the art collector and the book collector.
There is no debt deal.
You can't.
They're two different things.
Are they two different kinds of collector?
They're two different kinds of collector.
How would you describe the difference?
Well, for instance, I had a customer whose name was Sang, Phil Sang, in Chicago.
He started buying small things, you know, signatures and so on.
Turned out to be one of the great collectors of autographs.
He had a sale that brought over a million.
S-A-N-G?
Yes.
And the point being compared, like, to art, though, the painting?
No, you see, you can't compare that.
I mean, you can't compare a man that buys a picture that wants to hang up on the wall.
It's an ornament.
It's an ornament to a man who wants to buy a letter because he was a great man, you know, because he was
He gave something to the lawyer.
I see what you're saying.
One of the ironies, I think, of the book or manuscript collector is that you buy these things and you really can never touch them.
I mean, you leave, you don't display them, shall we say.
That's right.
And in many cases, you'll find the book collector is very private.
He doesn't even want anybody to know that he owns these things.
Whereas the owner of a great painting, everybody just walks into the house, looks at it.
Looks at it.
Now, how about yourself?
Have you ever been a collector?
I was interested in folklore myself.
I had a little collection, which I sold.
I mean, you know, it was getting beyond me.
I was too busy in the business, and I was traveling all over the world.
I used to go to Europe five, six, seven, eight times a year, ten times a year sometimes.
To buy books?
Yeah.
Did you buy from estates, or you went to auctions?
I went to auctions.
Do you like buying at auction?
I was a very heavy buyer at auction years ago, very heavy.
What kind of instincts do you work with?
It's something that you know.
You have clients and you think that this man ought to be interested in that.
So you buy it or buy it for him.
Do you buy often just on speculation with the thought?
That you might have a client?
Of course you are, of course, of course.
I mean, let's say that you were bidding on the Shakespeare's, and Manny wasn't there with you.
I don't know whether I would have gone that high.
I don't know.
I mean, that's a lot of money for the Shakespeare's.
That's a lot of money.
Because Shakespeare is as wonderful as they are.
They're not rare books.
There was one a year ago, was sold for $600 and some odd thousand dollars.
This very set.
Crouse had it last.
I called it Crouse.
And they had it listed in their catalog just 15 years ago for $165,000.
There you go.
And the thing went up to $2 million.
You know, I mean, how can you explain things?
It's very difficult.
And yet, how high do you... I don't know.
I don't know.
It all depends how well you're in with your clients.
And it helps that the client's there with you, too, doesn't it?
It helps that the client's there with you.
You answered the question.
But have you ever gone to any of these auctions where they don't... The client doesn't really want the competition to know who he is, who's buying it.
Oh, yes.
Lots of people don't want their names mentioned.
Nicholas Barker, you know Nicholas Barker?
I did an interview with him a few weeks ago from the British Library.
Yeah.
He said...
He feels that you can really tell the climate of the market more by the underbidder than the one who gets the prize.
In other words, we don't know how high Manny would have been willing to go to get those Shakespeare's.
I don't think he would have gone any higher.
He quit, right?
Because he hesitated.
Remember John said, think about it?
I was sitting right there, man.
I was sitting as close to him, closer than I'm sitting to you.
And I heard the conversation going on.
What were they saying?
You know, you just go ahead, you know.
Yeah, but he told them to think about it.
He was ready to— And he put his hand up, you know, and— And that was that.
So, in other words, this was it, two million, and then I'm out.
I wonder who he was bidding against.
That would be nice to know who the competition was.
Well, I don't know.
Dr. Gallery could tell you.
It was a telephone bidder, but it was... Maybe a telephone bid, I don't know.
Yeah, but Quaritch wasn't in that.
Quaritch was buying pretty much everything else.
He was buying a lot of stuff, Quaritch.
Yeah, he got the Cervantes for, I'm told, for a Spanish collector, is what I heard.
Yeah, you buy for people, you know, like I used to do.
But you see, I'm not so heavy in buying today, because at my age,
I just hang on with a few people.
Yeah.
But I hear the book Grapevine out there that you're still pretty well involved in this.
Of course I'm involved.
I'm always involved.
I'm involved all the time, and I will always be involved.
I'm told you know where all the great books are, all the great pages.
That's right.
I know where a lot of the books are, and I know where collections that I've made that would give it away to institutions.
Well, that must be satisfying to some degree.
You know?
Like, for instance, which collections have been given to institutions that you can think of offhand?
Well, a man by the name of Hugh Peele gave this whole collection.
Famous, yeah.
Yeah, gave this whole collection, you know, it's in Kentucky.
That's a famous collection.
Sure.
You built that collection?
Yeah.
These are very famous collections he's mentioning.
I haven't had all of them.
Great collection of Charles and Mary Lamb.
Oh, my.
Was that original manuscript style?
Yeah, that's right.
And where did that go?
That went to Kentucky.
Yeah.
Do you kind of have mixed emotions when you see it go to an institution, and then you know it's never going to be offered again?
Of course.
Because as a dealer, you might like to say, geez, I'd like to have another whack at that.
Well, you may or may not.
I mean, all the things you see.
You see, the market has changed so dramatically, so dramatically.
in the last five years, that sometimes I don't recognize what's going on.
Talk to me a little bit about that.
How has it changed, not just the money?
Are you talking just in terms of the value, or...?
I'm talking about money value, dollar-wise.
But the institutions aren't buying as much.
It's the private collector who's... Well, the private collector has more money than he ever had before.
And the institutions don't have what they used to have.
That's about the nutshell of it, right there.
That's the whole thing, right there.
That's what I wrote for this Sunday.
That's the essence of what I said, is that David Redden feels that we're in a new golden age of book collecting.
Would you agree with that?
Well, yes and no.
Don't forget you don't have as many
book sales as there were years ago.
And the money is freer.
Today?
Yeah.
What do you mean freer, looser?
Looser, I mean, people are willing to throw it around.
People are willing to, that's right.
You think that, I mean, is that correct?
Is that a correct assumption?
That's right.
And you say it amazes you to see it.
It amazes me to see it because being in the business for the many years that I've been in, sometimes it was hard to sell a client, you know, and he's got to figure out where the money is going to come from, you know.
But today it seems to be.
Do you find, now my regular job is I'm a book review editor.
I'm the book review editor of the Worcester Telegram in Massachusetts.
Oh.
And I review books.
I'm a critic as well as a writer of collecting.
And I find, and the reason I say this is that I find, having done this for 12 years now, that when I get, I feel that I know people.
You're just a baby.
That's nice to hear.
You're just an infant.
You're an infant.
You've made my day.
I feel that to know a person is to know their reading habits.
Well, of course.
And do you feel the same way as a book dealer?
That's right.
I mean, that almost, that you can almost,
consider yourself something of a psychiatrist.
That's perhaps a little too strong.
That's a little bit too strong, you know.
But a confidant, certainly.
That's different.
You have a window into the person's... See, let me give you an example.
I've got it right here, which I'm working on now.
Wonderful.
There was a man by the name of Litauer.
That name's familiar for some reason.
And he was...
He was a taught riding, horse riding, at a big place in Long Island.
Known all over the world.
You know, his riding, teaching people how to saddle and ride a horse.
Austrian arts.
That's right.
I met him about, oh, I don't know, 30, 40 years ago.
He died.
And you see, here is this collection which I have to appraise.
And he's got books from the
He's got books from the 15th century.
Wow, 15th century.
These are even pre-incunibles, aren't they?
I mean, incunibles.
1632, 1623, 1685, 1619.
Then he goes on.
So this fellow's name is Liddauer?
Yeah.
Is he an American?
Or did he say British?
I don't know what he was, but he wasn't, he was a poet.
And then he's got... And then he's got the modern books, you know.
So he really covers the subject.
Yeah.
Now, are you appraising this?
For the estate.
For the estate, which probably intends to put it up for auction, is that?
No, I don't know what she's going to do.
I spoke to Mrs. Liddow.
This is interesting, and I'm not talking about the, and this is not with respect to the Liddowers, or anyone specifically.
There's a collection of books that I have to do on the Vietnam War.
That's a very interesting subject now.
See?
Only on the Vietnam War.
How do you appraise these?
When there really isn't a bibliography.
There is a bibliography, but most of these are out of print, and you kind of put a, you know, you get a feeling of what a book is worth, and you put a price on it, and a collection.
You could put a bigger price than an individual book.
Because it's a collection.
Because it's the easy way to get the whole thing fast.
If you've got all of Dickens, all of Dickens is worth more than
than all of Dickens in individual segments.
Probably twice, actually.
Isn't that what the figure is, generally, sometimes?
How about taste and fashion?
You say you've seen the market change.
How about taste and fashion in book collecting?
Have you seen that change?
Yes, it changes.
Sure, that changes.
At one time, a North, you couldn't sell a North, but all of a sudden,
something happened and the world runs and tries to buy it.
Well, Melville was like that for the longest time, wasn't he?
Well, I sold Bradley Melville's Bible.
God, he used.
He's got a little story that just popped out, didn't he?
Coming up at sale, I think.
Now, where did you find Melville's Bible?
I found it in Joliet, Illinois.
And how did you get wind of it?
Well, a customer of mine who was an autograph collector came to his house one night, and there I saw this and some other medical things, and I bought them all and I sold them to Brasley.
Did he know what he had, the guy?
Oh, sure, sure.
You must have a million stories about extraordinary finds.
Oh, yes, I have a million stories.
I was going to look for a list here.
I suppose this is in another file.
I gave Bradley a list of the library that I bought.
He was sitting where you're sitting.
And he went through it, and he used to mark H-B-N.
He marked it H-B-N.
And he marked it on the edge, H-B-N, H-B-N.
When I brought the library in... Very easy, wasn't it?
Yes.
When I brought the library in, there were eight or ten
part of the whole group, you know, that had his mark.
And I put him in front of him.
It came to 18,000-something, I don't remember the exact amount.
And he took his wallet out and he wrote a check out.
And they carried him out?
Yeah.
Did he love books?
He loved books.
Did something happen to him when he, I mean, that you could see when he came in contact with a great book?
I guess I'm looking for
some kind of insight into what it is that really transforms a person into what we call bibliomaniacs.
Do you have any thoughts on that?
I'm not a physician.
I don't know.
I'm not a psychiatrist.
I don't know what can... But motivation, I guess, is what I mean.
You must have some sense as to what motivates people to do this.
Well, it's a thing that...
It's a lot for a thing, you know.
You start with one, then you get two, then you get three, then you get four.
And you say, well, I'll add to it to see myself.
Yeah, but for instance, now you're talking about the equestrian collection.
Here's the wife having it appraised.
She, I would imagine, didn't share the same enthusiasm for the subject as the husband did.
Of course not.
Well, that was his profession, his occupation, but Bradley certainly wasn't a bird, he wasn't an ornithological of what, how do you put it?
He wasn't a bird specialist, yet he loved books about birds, you know, finest collections.
Well, he started with reading W.H.
Hudson, you know, as a naturalist, and he pulled out a book, and with that we started, and it just went on and on and on.
There'll never be another collection like it.
That is a shame.
And I understand that he actually, there was something in the will that, that it wasn't clear, but he did give the trust the option to sell it as a unit.
I have a copy of his will here.
Yeah?
Yes, it's all going to the trust of the Bessemer Trust.
The Bessemer Trust.
Yes.
And I guess their position is, their responsibility is to maximize the estate.
That's right, and to take care of the family.
Don't forget that.
But of course, the family's not bad at all.
No, of course not.
I mean, it's not like they need the proceeds of that library for their livelihood.
Ms.
Bessemer was Bessemer Steele.
two children with a prison wife, Alice and Bradley, Jr.
And he has one daughter left from the first union.
How about yourself?
Do you love books?
I do.
I've been with books all my life.
I think books all the time.
But I mean, you love them beyond the fact that it's your profession, that it's just something that you pick up.
I wonder if you could tell me what a book means to you.
I do take the same pride, say, in building Bradley Martin's collection as Bradley Martin took in building it and owning it.
That's right.
Same way.
I mean, that's a fair statement?
That's a fair statement.
And so when you got him the better Audubon, you felt good, not only because he got a better Audubon, but you felt I got a better Audubon.
That's true.
That's right.
Am I in the right?
I wouldn't let him buy the other one.
One of the responsibilities that you acquire, I guess, as a dealer over the... You know, you've got to know your customer.
Yeah.
And you've got to know how much money he's got to afford to go.
I guess, you know, integrity is everything.
Of course.
You know, you wouldn't... I don't know, your financial secretary, but would you go out and buy something for $100,000?
I certainly don't have the wherewithal to do that, but... All right, there you go.
But you're in life, you know.
But I think what we're saying is these people came to trust you, not only for your knowledge of books, but for the fact that you were going to give them a very honest evaluation of what it was worth.
I mean, you hear it said that certain collectors single-handedly, because of their indiscriminate buying, were responsible for the market going crazy.
Of course.
Because a dealer will say, hey, there's a guy in New York who buys modern first American books.
And he'll pay anything for it.
So all of a sudden, they'll go out and they'll buy a Faulkner that maybe ought to go for $2,500.
And they put $5,000, $6,000 on it.
I'm just talking in generalities about it.
Talk about Faulkner.
I had a lady write me a letter.
She said she's got a copy of the marble form.
That was Faulkner's first book.
And I wrote back and I said, yes, I'd be interested in it.
She said, how much would you pay?
I said, I told her, I called her on the phone after I'd written it.
I said, I'd like to see it.
If it's all right, I'll give you $1,000 worth.
So she came clear off of it.
And out of her bag, she sat down, and out of her bag she pulled this thing out, and there was a copy in the dust jacket.
So I wrote her a check right away, and she said, would you buy another one?
And she pulled them out.
Oh, my gosh.
Wow.
She had two of them?
So I said to her, I said, well, here's the story she told me.
She said,
Parker lived in her mother's house in the South.
Wow.
And when this book was published, you know, he gave his, I want his grandmother one, but this one won it.
There's only 70 copies of this book accounted for.
And we're talking about a book that's exceedingly skit.
I just saw it, I just saw it, the Christie sale that you went to a couple weeks ago, they had a marble farm.
Yeah.
And I think they got, they got a pretty good price for it.
I forget, it was $13,000, $14,000, I think.
So you see when things happen, you see how she pulled another one, you know?
It was like pulling a rabbit out of a hat.
How long ago is this, roughly?
Oh, this must be 12 years ago, 15 years ago.
And you obviously had clients immediately who would... Oh, yes, I sold them both immediately, the same day as a matter of fact.
Really?
I collect Faulkner, and obviously the Marble Pawn is one... I remember Joyce when you couldn't give Joyce away.
I remember buying 135 letters of Joyce for a paper guy.
A dealer bought them, and he said to me one day, he said, would you want to buy a Joyce collection?
I said, how much is it?
He said, $1,100.
I said, I'll buy it.
So I sold it to a customer of mine.
He eventually sold it.
He eventually sold it to Southern Illinois.
University.
They have a pretty good choice collection.
What do you tell it to them for?
I think 50,000.
Not bad.
Today would bring millions.
Four or five times a million.
I mean, you can't... You can't judge.
You can't look back.
You've got to look forward.
Don't look back, because if you look back, you'll be a sorrowful man.
Well, with that in mind, though, you must have some stories about ones that got away, too.
The one?
You must have some stories about opportunities that you missed.
Oh!
Some that must still hurt a little bit, too.
Oh, can I tell you?
Well, can I tell you?
Well, I mean, what can I tell you?
For instance, I sold Bradley the copy of Washington's copy of The Federalist, which is just Washington.
That's okay.
You don't have to look at it.
No, no, no.
How we doing?
Good.
Oh, here it is.
This is it here.
Here it is in the January 1990 South of the newsletter.
You can take this with you.
Okay.
Well, they're saying $400,000.
I have another copy.
It'll probably go for more than that, right?
I don't know.
That's a question.
But you sold that to Bradley.
Yes.
And it's signed by George Washington.
Presented by Madison Brown.
Where did you find that?
Cape of the Hearst estate.
How did you manage to get the inside?
I don't know how.
How about Rosenbach?
Did you know Rosenbach?
Oh, I knew him very well.
I told him one day.
I was sitting up with him in his house.
Was he down in Philadelphia or here?
No, I was in Philadelphia many times.
I said to him one day, I said, you should have died 10 years ago.
So they looked at me.
I said, you would have died a champion.
You see, when these foreign dealers came over to America during the Hitler regime, a lot of them were steeped in bibliography, and they knew the business very well.
They were driven out by Hitler.
They were driven out.
There's been some lectures on this, too, at Columbia.
Sure, of course.
Yeah, go ahead.
Naturally, they took over, because they were steeped in this thing, you know.
In bibliography.
So what did Rosenbach say?
Oh, he laughed.
But he wasn't?
He said you don't think he knew?
He knew.
He was very, very, very interested.
But this is what I told him.
Just like that, I was talking to him.
And this is what I told him.
I said, you should die 10 years.
You're going to die the champion.
This was during the war.
Yeah.
Because he died, I think, around the 50s sometime.
He was a great collector, of course.
Oh, yeah.
You know, he kept... Well, how do you feel about that?
Now, here's a guy who kept a lot of the best things for himself.
I mean, it's hard to... Well, he was very much interested in it, and he collected certain things that he liked.
It's all there in Philadelphia.
It's a little museum.
It's beautiful.
I've been there.
Yes.
I think eventually it will go to the Philadelphia Library.
Do you think so?
Yeah.
I thought they had their own little trusteeship down there.
Well, they have a little trusteeship,
I think that's my opinion.
Well, I sure hope they keep it intact just the way it is.
Well, it'll be intact, but I think it'll go over to them.
Because the house is wonderful.
Oh, yeah.
And his brother's... The one on Delancey Street?
Yeah.
I stayed at that house many a night.
Really?
Yes.
This is where we lived, and it's downtown.
It's like the Philadelphia version of Beacon Hill.
I don't know what they call it.
That's right.
And it's because we're, you know, my wife knows Boston better than she knows.
Oh, you're from Boston?
Well, we're from Massachusetts, Worcester.
Well, I helped the American Jewish Historical Society.
You did?
I have an interesting question about that.
That manuscript that they sold, that they got from Wessing Rosenwald.
Yeah, they got $40,000.
Well, more than that, $176,000.
$170,000.
Yeah.
They sold it at the 70s.
Right.
And then I guess it finally found its way to .
.
The Jewish regime.
What do you think about that?
Now, this is a case which .
I don't know.
I question that.
I spoke to .
You know, I was with them for so many years.
I'm on the board, as a matter of fact.
In the .
Really?
You're on the board up there?
Sure.
I mean, I guess they needed the money, certainly.
They said that they needed the money, but they accepted the thing from Rosenwald with the understanding that they would keep it forever.
He bought it to prevent the Nazis from getting it.
That's right.
In fact, he said in his memoirs, it's the only time he ever told Rosenbach, price is no object.
Whether that's true or not.
That's true.
It makes for a nice story.
No, that's true.
You know, I was, when Rosenbach's grandson got married, I was invited to the wedding in Chicago, in Chenoweth.
And Lessing and I were sitting at a little table.
We were discussing books.
We had this whole ceremony.
He was very interested.
Another man that had a great letter that was sold at Sotheby's was that famous Jefferson letter.
Oh, yeah.
Now, that came from Pittsburgh.
I saw it hanging in his house at the time.
We're talking about Lessing now.
No, not Lessing, no.
It was, I'll give you his name in a minute, I was hanging this out.
When he died, she put it up at auction, and Jesselson bought it.
Jesselson, very wealthy man.
I think he gave it to Yoshida.
I think so, I'm not sure, but I think that's where it is.
See, I'm really interested in that particular story about Rosenwald.
that anecdote about saying price is no object the essence of this story is he wanted to buy something which he hated because this thing this thing is a famous document that that justifies the persecution of jews it's a viciously anti-semitic document he did not want it to go
And in fact, the underbidders were the Nazis, and they made a big stink about they wanted to open the bidding again.
And he said, no, no, it's mine.
And he thought he hated it so much he didn't put it in his own collection.
No, no.
He gave it away.
He gave it to the Jewish society, and the understanding was it stays here.
We never want this thing to get in the wrong hands.
But they needed the money 50 years later, and they sold it.
So this is why I'm questioning the propriety.
Maybe they should have offered it back to the estate.
Because I don't know what contacts they had between each other.
You see, that's my interest in it.
I don't know what contacts they had between each other.
But how do you feel about that?
I feel it all depends what they told them.
If they told them that they were going to keep it, you know what I mean, then they should have kept it.
Fortunately, it is a yeshiva now.
And so it is in a place where it should be.
That's right.
I mean, that's all you need is for somebody like Gaddafi to get a thing like this.
I mean, these things replicate themselves, you know.
And, you know, so this is... What I would hope in my book, where there's a young kid up in Amherst, Massachusetts, by the name of Aaron Lasky.
You ever heard of him?
He's a kid.
He's in his 30s.
He just got a MacArthur Fellowship, and he started this Yiddish library.
They say he's put together the finest collection of Yiddish and Hebrew things anywhere.
Well, the best collection is YIVO.
Well, how do you spell that?
YIVO is what?
YIVO, YIVO.
Here on New York City.
Yeah?
Do they collect Holocaust things, too?
Sure.
Yeah.
You know who else has a great collection?
The Beck Institute.
Beck.
Leo Beck.
Of what?
Of Yiddish things or Holocaust things?
Holocaust things.
This is an interesting question, you see.
Who collects the horrible things?
They have it.
Leo Beck Institute.
Okay.
I mean, because I think that's a very... 73th Street.
Don't you think that's a very interesting area of collecting?
Not because you like the stuff.
You hate the stuff.
But somebody has to preserve it.
That's right.
And Yibo, Yibo is on 5th Avenue and 86th Street, right on the corner.
That's Yiddish.
Yiddish.
Uh-huh.
Okay.
Leo Beck is not Yiddish.
No, that's Holocaust.
That's Holocaust material and general material.
But Jewish, Yiddish, is Yibo.
Okay.
This is an interesting area for me to pursue.
See, I'm not just talking about collecting and how you collect and how you tell the first edition.
That's silly.
You can learn that anywhere.
I'm trying to talk about the spirit.
And I think in this country, a thesis can be made that the book collector is responsible for the preservation of scholarship, of human thought.
You've got guys like Morgan, who set up the library.
That's right.
You've got guys like Folger, the Shakespeare Library.
Huntington, the Huntington Library.
Newbery, the Newbery Library.
You know, the Scheider Library down at Princeton.
Well, I don't know.
That's a family library.
It's a family library.
He's still alive.
Shady is still alive.
And I'm told that his daughter is now interested in the collection.
Right, right.
Have you ever had any dealings with them?
Yes, I sold them things many, many years ago.
They've got a Gutenberg Bible.
Yes, I have.
One of the very few privately owned.
I had a customer who was the president of Bank for Savings in New York.
His name was DeCorsi Dales, F-A-L-E-S.
He loved books.
There was a man that, he was a banker.
He was president of the bank.
And what I tell you now is not for publication.
I'll shut it off, okay?
I have it on the tape.
May you say that again, please?
I won't use his name, but it's an instance.
It's either you go or the books go.
The world was splitting, you know.
So what happened?
And he came to me, and he said he'd like to put his library somewhere, you know, somewhere.
So I thought for a while, and I tried.
And, you know, nobody wanted to get in the room.
I mean, you know, a library has
How many volumes approximately would you say we're talking about?
Oh, thousands.
Thousands.
Like more than 25,000?
Yeah.
And I finally went to NYU.
I had some friends at NYU.
And I managed to get to the president.
And I went in, had an interview, I had an appointment with him, came with the president.
And I told him my story, like I'm telling it to you.
He was a man that loved books, autographs, and he would like to establish it somewhere.
And the quality was excellent.
Excellent.
And he thought for a while and he said, well, I think we could work it out.
Talk to my man who's in charge of
rooms or some of them.
So they gave us three rooms on 5th Avenue and 8th Street.
NYU did.
NYU.
And we started there.
And then we moved it into the, then we rented a floor on 10th Street, big floor.
And we had a full librarian.
Wow.
We had, and this man had, he gave NYU one of the great
collections of books and autographs, thousands of letters, thousands of letters.
Mainly because his wife gave him an ultimatum.
The other one was... I'm just going to switch this on the other side before you continue.